Introduction 
Open Data Manchester CIC recognises that it is essential to provide equal opportunities to all persons without discrimination. This policy sets out the organisation's position on equal opportunity in all aspects of employment, including recruitment and promotion, giving guidance and encouragement to employees at all levels to act fairly and prevent discrimination on the grounds of sex, race, marital status, part-time and fixed term contract status, age, sexual orientation or religion. 
Statement of policy 
(a) It is the policy of Open Data Manchester CIC to ensure that no job applicant or employee receives less favourable treatment on the grounds of sex, race, marital status, disability, age, part-time or fixed term contract status, sexual orientation or religion, or is disadvantaged by conditions or requirements that cannot be shown to be justifiable. The organisation is committed not only to its legal obligations but also to the positive promotion of equality of opportunity in all aspects of employment. 
(b) The organisation recognises that adhering to the Equal Opportunities Policy, combined with relevant employment policies and practices, maximises the effective use of individuals in both the organisation’s and employees´ best interests. Open Data Manchester CIC recognises the great benefits in having a diverse workforce with different backgrounds, solely employed on ability. 
(c) The application of recruitment, training, and promotion policies to all individuals will be on the basis of job requirements and the individual’s ability and merits. 
(d) All employees of the organisation will be made aware of the provisions of this policy. 
Recruitment and promotion 
(a) Advertisements for posts will give sufficiently clear and accurate information to enable potential applicants to assess their own suitability for the post. Information about vacant posts will be provided in such a manner that does not restrict its audience in terms of sex, race, marital status, disability, age, part-time or fixed term contract status, sexual orientation or religion. 
(b) Recruitment literature will not imply a preference for one group of applicants unless there is a genuine occupational qualification which limits the post to this particular group, in which case this must be clearly stated. 
(c) All vacancies will be circulated internally. 
(d) All descriptions and specifications for posts will include only requirements that are necessary and justifiable for the effective performance of the job. 
(e) All selection will be thorough, conducted against defined criteria and will deal only with the applicant’s suitability for the job. Where it is necessary to ask questions relating to personal circumstances, these will be related purely to job requirements and asked to all candidates. 
Employment 
(a) Open Data Manchester CIC will not discriminate on the basis of sex, race, marital status, disability, age, part-time or fixed term contract status, sexual orientation or religion in the allocation of duties between employees employed at any level with comparable job descriptions. 
(b) Open Data Manchester CIC will put in place any reasonable measures and/or adjustments within the workplace for those employees who become disabled during employment or for disabled appointees. 
(c) All employees will be considered solely on their merits for career development and promotion with equal opportunities for all. 
Training 
(a) Employees will be provided with appropriate training regardless of sex, race, marital status, disability, age, part-time or fixed term contract status, sexual orientation or religion. 
(b) All employees will be encouraged to discuss their career prospects and training needs with their Line Manager or the HR Department. 
Grievances and victimisation 
(a) Open Data Manchester CIC emphasises that discrimination is unacceptable conduct which may lead to disciplinary action under the organization’s Disciplinary Procedure. 
(b) Any complaints of discrimination will be pursued through the organisation’s Grievance Procedure.
